Welcome to Topcast and to the long-awaited, or at least often mentioned, Episode 100.
This here is finally my interview with David in full, unabridged form.
It contains all my questions for David and multiple more questions.
This is basically an audio-only podcast, there are no visuals today.
My friend recently told me that he doesn't like it when I say to audio-only listeners
that the YouTube version is sometimes better because I put lots of pretty visuals in it.
He says that he listens while he's out walking or jogging and can't look at a screen.
Well today, Adam, you don't need to worry about that.
And to all the other Adams out there who I think outnumber the YouTube viewers by about
a 10 to 1 ratio, I'll keep in mind, moving forward as we say, that so many of you only
listen and don't watch screens.
Perhaps it would be more fair if it was a 10 to 1 ratio of audio-only to visually important
podcast from now on, we'll see.
So this episode is, I have to say up front, rather an astonishing personal accomplishment
for me.
Everyone has people they admire growing up.
Among my peer group, like any group of school kids I guess, the common thing was looking
up to famous sports stars or music idols or movie stars.
I know I idolized Arnold Schwarzenegger.
This was back in his early days of doing movies, not his more recent political stuff.
Back then he was quite the optimist and his personal story was easily as heroic as any
of his on-screen characters.
Nevertheless, I was never under any illusions.
I'd ever get to meet Arnold, much less have a conversation with him.
I lived in Australia in the southwestern suburbs of Sydney.
It's not the place to come across movie stars, sports celebrities, singers or accomplished
scientists for the most part.
But happily for me, some intellectual heroes of mine were accessible by pure chance and
circumstance in some cases.
I've mentioned before on this podcast that Professor Paul Davies, author of The Mind
of God and many other books, produced a couple of physics documentary series here in Australia
called The Big Questions.
He also used to write articles for local news outlets and he appeared on TV here rather regularly
when he did live here in Australia for a time.
I read, listened to and watched anything and everything Professor Davies ever put out there
that I could find and early on he was the guy, my scientific hero so to speak.
He seemed to know everything for some reason, so it was an amazing stroke of luck when one
day he just happened to turn up, unannounced.
At an event I was helping to host at university, I got his autograph, I actually got his autograph
on my philosophy uni notes as it turned out.
Not one of his books.
The name of the subject in which the uni notes were compiled was called God, Life, the Universe
and everything which was right up his alley and the lecture notes actually had excerpts
from one of his books that I proudly showed him.
I was literally studying his stuff at the time.
So I ended up having a brief conversation with Paul Davies, winner of the Templeton Prize
and I kind of thought that in my early 20s this was a pretty good accomplishment for
an undergrad physics student still living with their parents in an exceedingly typical
home on a typical street and a typical suburb, one among hundreds in greater Sydney, Australia.
I guess to put it in perspective it would have been rather like an aspiring pop singer
just happening to bump into Michael Jackson or Madonna or for younger listeners Justin
Bieber.
So that was the late 90s by which time I'd already read The Fabric of Reality by David
Deutsch multiple times and the remarkable thing about having read that book was that
I just had to talk about it with someone.
I think many people who read the book end up feeling that way, it's kind of unique
in that respect.
It doesn't happen often.
As much as I loved Paul Davies books I never really felt a need to disgust them with groups
of people but David's book was different.
But sadly there was no one to really talk to about it.
At university the people around me, even in my physics lectures, just didn't seem to
get the significance of it.
Well of course they hadn't read it to begin with.
At the same time I was reformulating my own thoughts from decades of schooling and some
years of tertiary education in light of what The Fabric of Reality was saying about the
nature of knowledge and so on.
I was converted by that book to the many worlds interpretation of quantum theory.
In other words, realism.
I was converted to popurian epistemology.
In other words, I had some insight into what knowledge actually was and how it was created.
But whenever I mentioned either of those things, let's say many worlds to a physics tutor
or professor or popper to a philosophy tutor or professor, I barely ever got more than
a shrug or maybe a hint that I should go and read about Bohmian mechanics or maybe take
more seriously what Feynman had to say about understanding quantum theory or in the case
of popper to look more deeply into the Vienna circle and what Wittgenstein had to say on
the matters that Popper was writing about.
In other words, in both cases there were not many sympathetic ears.
Now I cannot remember exactly how it happened, and this is in the era before Google, but
some search engine or other allowed me to eventually find myself online in the late
90s and the early 2000s able to, now and again, fire a question to David Deutch himself via
email about The Fabric of Reality.
I was astonished that he was the guy, the inventor of quantum computation, that seemingly
no one much knew about, but seemed to know a heck of a lot more and make considerably
more sense than anyone else I'd ever encountered in academia or intellectual circles.
I was one of the privileged few in retrospect who knew a second book was on the way, though
we never knew what it would be called nor when it would arrive, but the anticipation
grew over the decade until finally it was published.
I think perhaps only Star Wars fans waiting for the next canonic film to drop know exactly
that same feeling.
Well, even in that case they don't really.
Films are a transient thing, but a book, like The Beginning of Infinity, is kind of bottomless
in a way that no other consumable content quite is.
So I've been a fan of David Deutch for decades now, so it still blows my mind that I could
be in a position to actually just have a chat with him as we do here, albeit from the other
side of the world, and on that, me being far closer to Antarctica than most of the population
of the planet, and most people who are listening to this will be far closer to the Arctic,
the finiteness of the speed of light did catch David and I out on more than one occasion,
making this episode, in some places, a little bit disjointed so editing was required for
listenability in some places, but hopefully I've done a good enough job that you don't
notice.
I'm not a polished interviewer, of course.
This seemed to be half conversation, half interview, and I have learned now on putting
this together to not speak over the person I am talking to, or try to fill pauses with
noises of agreement.
I have learned those lessons now, but I did not know them beforehand, which means there
are some places where I do seem to forget I am being recorded.
As this is episode 100, a sort of announcement is in order, that being that Topcast will
continue to go from strength to strength in a space of podcast that seems to expand continuously,
but I think there is a nice little niche here that needs to be filled, so I'll continue
doing what I do, but with more energy thanks to the support of Patreons, and especially
of course to Navarre Ravacart, who's own worldview and wisdom aligns so closely with
the optimism, view of progress, and wealth of David Deutsch, and what I am trying to
promote here.
So I'll continue doing what I do, which is long form podcasts, especially on Deutsch's
The Fabric of Reality, Marletto's The Science of Can and Can't, and Pinker's Rationality
for now.
But I'll also be broadening out and refining things, making lots more stand alone episodes
and really tightening things up on some of the ideas we like to talk about here, and making
far more brief podcasts as well.
And maybe now and again I'll do the odd recorded conversation once in a while.
So look forward to that in the coming weeks and months and years if you're a fan.
This introduction is already longer than I hoped for, but I actually haven't done a
job of introduction, which I should do in an episode like this, I need to introduce
my guest.
But of course David needs no introduction, especially if you're listening to this as
a subscriber of Topcast, because Topcast is largely a podcast devoted to the work and
worldview of David Deutsch, the inventor of the theory of quantum computation, author
of the first quantum algorithm, intellectual successor to the epistemology and philosophy
of Karl Popper, author of The Fabric of Reality and The Beginning of Infinity, creator of
Constructor Theory, David is a Fellow of the Royal Society, winner of the Dirac Prize
in 1998 for quote, pioneering work in quantum computation leading to the concept of a quantum
computer and for contributing to the understanding of how such devices might be constructed from
quantum gates in quantum networks.
And he was also the co-winner of the Dirac Medal in 2017 for quote, building the foundations
of quantum information science.
His books have won prizes and he has won other prizes as well.
Go to his website and the about me section to find out more about all that.
But as I record this, I've just learned that this week, the final week of November 2021,
David has won the Isaac Newton Medal from the Institute of Physics in the United Kingdom
for quote, founding the discipline named quantum computation and establishing quantum computations
fundamental idea now known as the qubit or quantum bit end quote.
He has now also been elected a Fellow of that Institute of Physics.
Prizes, accolades and accomplishments aside, the impact of David Deutsch on the world is
yet to be fully realized, but it is going to become perhaps something like that of an
Einstein or a Newton or a Darwin in my opinion, which is why we're so lucky to be able to
interrogate him once in a while.
Once the first fully functional universal quantum computer is built, the landscape of
the world will change.
When the average person understands and appreciates that its function can only be explained by
recourse to a multiverse, the intellectual world will change.
When people look back in retrospect and realize he was right all along in what he said about
quantum computation and therefore about explanations and hence popper, the world will be changed.
We can only hope that that change goes deeper still into how the education of young people
is handled, how we deal with problems both known and unknown and why progress, optimism
and wealth need to motivate us all individually and as a civilization.
The world will be changed and we will see that what I've just said about putting David
alongside the biggest names in science and philosophy is neither hyperbole or hubris.
It is a serious claim.
I just wish it would all happen far sooner.
But that's enough of an introduction.
I'll have a few brief remarks at the end of this.
But for now, I present to you my interview, my discussion, my conversation with David
Dodge.
Okay, well thanks very much anyway for doing this David.
It's a real honor to talk to you and be able to record this conversation.
And this book that I've spent the last few years exploring now is unlike just about any
other to my mind and I've said this a few times that it's unlike other popular science
books because it's not really a popular science book.
One thing that it contains within it that is different to other science books is what
I might say are sort of discoveries in philosophy and physics or at the very least new ways
of refining and explaining material you've put out there elsewhere in other forms perhaps.
The first time this seems to crop up actually is in chapter one, the reach of explanations
and there we get the concept of good explanations, good explanations being actual explanations
that account for what is out there in the world and how it works.
That are hard to vary, these hard to vary explanations.
Now I'm convinced and most people who hear about it become convinced over time but I
think there's a lot of people who think well science isn't it just about testable theories?
Why isn't testable theories enough?
So there was a lot about explanations even in my first book and some careful readers
pointed out that I'd never actually explained what an explanation is in Fabrica reality.
In fact I seem to have taken a bit of a cop out path by saying just saying about explanations
that there isn't any closed list of attributes that an explanation must have and that's because
it seemed to me that and I think it does seem to many people that the difference between
an explanation and a prediction is obvious but to most people it was quite opaque.
So I thought about it and this is indeed one of the few things that I will acknowledge
is kind of a bit of an innovation in the beginning of infinity.
I thought about what exactly makes the difference and I thought of some examples such as the
explanation of the seasons as opposed to predicting them and then I think that the example that
I like best although again not everyone does is the example of the conjurer where you go
in and you go in to see this conjuring performance and you see some cups and balls and the conjurer
puts the ball under the cup and after a while you begin to predict that the cup where he
puts the ball under is not going to be the one where it ends up.
But that doesn't mean you can explain what's going on in the trick.
Yeah exactly so you can predict quite confidently that the ball isn't there and there you are
it's vindicated but that's not what you mean by how is the trick done.
What you mean is what has happened to bring about the thing you saw and so you're not asking for
an account of the thing you saw even a perfect prediction of the thing you saw you're asking
about the thing you didn't see.
Yes and this comes up so often throughout the book really and I think it's a subtle
point easily missed and of course the other example that you use and that you often go to is
this idea of dinosaurs the one thing that you actually can't observe is indeed the one thing
that you're invoking as actually existing and causing the phenomena that you do observe.
And in all these cases that unobserved thing is the thing that you're really interested in.
It's the only reason you're interested in any kind of prediction at all.
Yes and now this concept of then hard to vary where all the parts of the explanation have some
functional role and this is really what makes the explanation a good explanation as opposed to
any arbitrary account that could be easily varied mythological accounts and so on magical accounts.
Did that come to you did you have that in mind during the fabric of reality writing it then or
did it only come later in light of people saying you know can you sharpen up what you mean by
explanation. It's the latter I like I said while I was writing fabric of reality I kind of thought
that these were rather foolishly I thought that these were words that had an uncontroversial
meaning and it didn't occur to me that that that most people would not have this meaning in mind
although many people did so in that sense it wasn't something I invented
something that I realized needs to be elaborated to be written down more clearly
and then I started to think about well things that are explanations and things that aren't explanations
and like the ancient myths and so on and and then I thought with the with the conjurer
there are circumstances where the conjurer did it is the explanation that the person wants
yes you can imagine a person who believes in magic and is is sort of slowly coming out of that
state of mind like like James Randi's family when the historian when he was a teenager and when he
first exposed a fake psychic and and was horrified to find that most of the people in the audience
didn't want to know the truth yeah right yeah that happened more than once there was a famous I don't
know if you know the famous story that he was on Australian television he did the same to the
spoon bender Yuri Geller on one of our daytime lunchtime talk back television shows and the
audience was very upset with him and indeed the host was as well and stormed off the set he did
the same thing to Randy wow right so there there you have it I mean that that anger would happen
I suppose whether or not he revealed how he did it it was the fact that he was revealing that he
did do it that was the thing that angered them and that that was the relevant explanation in context
so that's why I have to say it's an explanation is hard to vary while still solving the problem
that it purports to solve yes which might be different for different people as well in the same
situation okay so you mentioned that that piece of sort of prosaic terminology explanation that
we all use but I think that you've put a spin on it that is is quite helpful but
turning to another word a word that you in fact don't use and it brings me to chapter two
and that's called and don't worry I'm not going to go through every single chapter chronologically
but uh then just a few of them um but chapter two is titled closer to reality but Karl Popper
had this term very silamitude which means something like closer to truth and it seems to me you've
deliberately avoided that word but why is it because it contains a misconception it's misleading or
it's a needless neologism what would be the reason to avoid such a word I think all of those things
and I think even even Popper I don't know the history of this very well but I think even Popper
went off it Popper in general was very into logic uh this is I think partly uh a sign of the times
that that uh the people who were uh doing the prevailing philosophy of science at the time
and positivism and logical positivism many of them were logicians and mathematical logicians
even Popper wanted a Popper originally uh didn't want to even to mention truth at all
and then he got converted by by Tarski and he tells a story uh about how they were sitting
on a park bench in Vienna and Tarski explained the correspondence theory of truth to him and he
realized that this is this is in fact a useful concept after all but I wonder what logical
scientific discovery would have looked like if he had in fact written the whole of it without
ever mentioning truth I think it it would have been worse in some ways in that it's it's difficult
to make the case for realism if you don't have a concept of truth and Popper was very keen to
formulate a realistic philosophy of science but on the other hand when you do introduce truth and
especially verisimilitude then the idea is that somehow we can utter truth or at least we can
utter something that's 90 true or something like that and we'd have thereby a method of measuring
that 90 percent I think verisimilitude was was not intended to be something you could measure
right but uh if if you can't measure it then its only use is a sort of philosophical
regulating principle and uh I think knowledge and problems are much better concepts probably
Popper's fundamental concept the way the way it turned out when when after all these experiments
with different conceptual frameworks or whatever well it is the idea of a problem because that
comes up not only in his philosophy of science but in his political philosophy as well and more
generally he he he generalizes it to even the problem situation of a gene now I'm not sure even
I would go that far but it's a very unifying concept and on the other hand I don't think
verisimilitude is useful at all and as I said even truth one has to be very careful to to use the
concept of truth only as a property of abstractions and never as something you can actually measure
or or know have have a direct access to so therefore would you avoid even saying that
scientific explanations or indeed explanations in any domain that we happen to be interested in
would even be approximately true because that would also entail some kind of quantitative
claim about how close we are or can we still use that word can we still say it's approximately true
or it's a it's there's some degree of accuracy in this claim about I think we we can use it
because again depending on the problem situation if one is speaking informally then one can use
imprecise terminology I just caught myself just a moment ago saying probably so you know I'm
generally opposed to the whole concept of probability I think it's a scam yes but but that
doesn't mean that in in everyday life we don't know what we mean when we're saying some
proper was probably meant so and so I don't mean that there was a stochastic process where he
where he could have meant something else with with the probability 0.15 yeah I often find
myself catching myself precisely the same way that you said generally it kind of has left my
vocabulary in just in day-to-day life using the word probably but I at the same time I don't
you know chastise myself too much because in order to communicate normally you know people
are going to use this word they understand I think yes what we mean and there is no such thing as a
perfectly precise language yes so we want to use terms and ways of understanding things that are
suitable to the problem that would bring me to my next question describing people for example as
chemical scum might be a very loose way of understanding what people are but Hawking did it
and you have an excellent refutation of this claim that Stephen Hawking did make which seems to be
the reasonably scientific way of understanding our place in the universe he said that we are just a
chemical scum on the surface of a typical planet orbiting a typical star and so on but you say
this place is not typical is it in in what sense isn't it typical I think the the the description of
humans as a chemical scum on earth is not accurate in the problem situation in which Hawking used
that term it's we are certainly made of chemicals but so is the rest of the earth and so so is all
other so is all other matter in the universe so to single us out as a scum in in these if you're
going to take these terms in the context of trying to describe something purely in terms in reductionist
terms of their constituents then it is simply false to add a pejorative term that pejorative
term comes from a different problem situation and a different vocabulary is needed it would be enough
to say we are chemicals like everything else in the universe and then you see that it would be
silly to call the earth a chemical scum or the sun or the solar system or the milky way galaxy
as as a chemical scum though in the sense in which we are it is too so we are a a special a
very special kind of chemical but then would that entail that the earth is special by virtue of the
fact that it is uniquely suited to ensuring that this set of chemicals called us is able to survive
off into some future that we are only sustained by the existence of this planet and we'll only
continue to be sustained by this planet so therefore we better look after the environment or else
we're going to go extinct yeah so you're putting that in a in a deliberately exaggerated way that
makes it much more wrong you could have said that with one tenth the emphasis and it would still be
wrong now it's true that the earth is is that living things can exist on earth only by virtue of
the fact that the earth provides by astronomical standards a very unusual set of circumstances
which if if they were to vary by astronomical standards by only a few percent then without
a lot of technology we would die and living things in general would die without technological
help but that doesn't at all mean that the earth is adapted to human existence or even to life but
especially to human existence very accurately it it it would be more true to say that the earth
is barely suitable for life it it provides a relatively stable temperature and sunlight
and living things manage to use that even though it's not very conveniently provided
and that that took it hundreds of millions of years to work out and the rest was provided by
life itself and most of the rest as far as humans go was provided by humans there there are very
very few places on earth that humans can live comfortably without technology that is without
ideas provided by them and not provided by the earth so i don't know maybe some south sea islands
with suitable coconuts or whatever they have there and even that would be a trap
because we are so constituted that if we did live in such an environment for some generations
our numbers would increase to the point when we will live it where we were living in misery again
so the earth is where living on earth what has been provided is really just the bare
necessities for us to live somewhere originally the great lift rift valley or something and the
rest has to be provided by us yes so the earth is not adapted to life but life can adapt itself to
the earth but the only thing that is going to survive in the long run in terms of regular life
not intelligent life like ourselves are the genes the genes are going to want to try and
make themselves survive and the animals won't care or the other species don't have this concept of
caring into the infinite future about their own survival however we do so we want to adapt ourselves
to the earth in some way or if not the earth and something far larger we want to adapt ourselves
to the universe in which we find ourselves and the one thing that enables us to do that is of
course solving our problems continually to create the knowledge in order to enable us to do so and
you have the great dichotomy of saying problems are inevitable but problems are soluble and here
i have heard over the years people push back against this especially the second part that
problems are soluble for example they argue we can't know everything and they will invoke
that it's provably the case that given girdle's result there are true statements we cannot prove
are true so there is some and there are some mathematics that's not decidable so some problems
are not soluble isn't isn't that correct what's the what's the argument against that line of
reasoning i i think that the this line of reasoning is reaching for a standard of knowing
that is impossible for anything it's it's not possible to know even provable things by the
standard that they're asking to know unprovable things when we say that something is provable
we mean that it's provable from certain axioms and girdle's theorem is about provability which
means provability from axioms now if you if you have an undecidable statement in some formal system
and if it was true you could always add that as another axiom and then it would be provable
so you might ask yeah but but how do we know that that statement you're adding is true
if we can't prove it well unfortunately that objection applies to any set of axioms and it
applies to the original set of axioms as well and uh this is this is uh a mistake that has been made
by many mathematicians even after girdle i think it was made by virtually all mathematicians before
girdle but even after mathematicians tend to think that there is a class of axioms that don't
need proof or something that that they are self proving or self self evident or they come from
mathematical intuition which is infallible or something like that but in fact the the axioms
the rules of inference in logic that for example if the proposition a and b is true then it is
necessarily the case that b is also true now it seems self-evident but uh it is not provable
so uh what are you going to do are you going to say that this is a problem that is insoluble
and therefore it's not true that problems are soluble no people don't don't bother saying it with
with axioms because they have this misconception that axioms are somehow enshrined by god or
something and we can know for sure that they are true yes but that's not what knowledge is about
we are trying to solve problems we're not trying to establish truths and uh girdle's
yes uh theorem is not about establishing truth either it's about deriving things from other
things yes yes and these some one uh line of discussion i often pursue here and correct me
if i'm wrong but this vast class of undecidable or unprovable statements which must vastly out
number the number that are provable statements they're in a sense uninteresting because that's
not what the claims of science physics for example consist of and so they don't have
and again i would i would appeal to your better knowledge on this they don't have any they can't
possibly have any effects on our world they're not going to help us to solve problems as we would
say we know they exist but beyond that what are they interesting in any way um well they're
certainly interesting because mathematics is interesting and and uh where we are interested
in abstractions as well as in physical problems um and the reason that that uh it seems implausible
at the moment that that um undecidable propositions might be relevant to some practical problem like
how to how to feed the world or how to eliminate viruses and and so on is that the undecidable
propositions are all about infinite sets infinite sets of things like the set of all numbers and
that kind of thing and uh physics as we currently conceive of it the the infinite sets that appear
in physics are very tame and don't have these problems in them but that's that's like you know
i can conceive that that maybe one day somebody invents a different physical theory where the
the undecidability of certain propositions about the real numbers would tell you something about
whether well about how to do and how not to do certain things that you want there i think roger
penrose once pointed out that certain theories of quantum gravity do depend on turing undecidable
propositions basically it's it's like you if you're working out a Feynman diagram to work out how
what the probability is that a certain gravitational wave will interact with another gravitational
wave you know this is very far from ordinary experience then if you want to work that out
accurately you have to do a sum you have to sum the amplitudes for for all possible processes
over all geometries and for all possible topologies and to enumerate all possible topologies in the
relevant sense i mean i'm not a mathematician i don't know about this stuff but but apparently
that's that's an undecidable task and therefore you couldn't work out this probability amplitude
for the gravitational wave doing something or other because you would have to have a mathematical
expression for all topologies in a in a given sense so that's an example of how in principle
laws of physics might have undecidable consequences yes and therefore that the undecidable consequences
are actually interesting well it would be physically interesting yes it you know in principle
something that you wanted to do might depend on working out this thing but i don't see any
particular reason for making a distance as long as we have the necessities of life and comfort
i don't see any reason for making a distinction between problems in engineering and in physics
and in pure mathematics i mean they're they're all problems they're all conflicts between theories
that that interest people people want to know what the resolution is one thing i say in in the
book about pure mathematical problems is that sometimes discovering that something is undecidable
is the solution to the problem in in the sense that it's the it's what you wanted to know
because you you have in mind some some prima facie argument that it that a certain proposition is
true and another prima facie argument that it that it's false and then you discover that it's
actually undecidable and that explains why you could have these two conflicting intuitions
about it and then right you can go and criticize your intuitions in other ways because you know
that you're not going to be able to resolve it by proving one of them true or false now you mentioned
in that answer there the concept of abstractions and you actually invoked abstractions in in talking
about it of course pure mathematics is about abstractions and i don't know what might be the
most controversial chapter in the book but i think among intellectual types to at least some extent
it would be chapter five if it's not going to be the white flowers a beautiful chapter it's going to
be the one that claims there is a reality to abstractions because to some people this seems
weirdly enough you know not to me i think not to most people listening to this but it can sound
like an appeal to the supernatural or some sort of woo because some people are physicalists they
think that everything just has to come down to the behavior of atoms but i wanted to ask you if
you distinguish between kinds of abstractions rather than defending the thesis that abstractions are
real i know this is not necessarily a well-defined area but for example something like numbers
they're abstractions are they different in kind to let's say knowledge because after all there may
be infinitely well there are infinitely many prime numbers and not all of those prime numbers ever
need to be instantiated in a physical substrate anywhere nevertheless they still exist but knowledge
to be knowledge has to be extantiae instantiated in a physical substrate it's also abstract but
well i might pull the brakes there can you explain if there are these different species of
abstractions and if so how do we understand the differences in their existence yes there are
different species of abstractions i mean maybe it's better to say there there is a classification
of abstractions and some classifications are quite useful because abstractions within the same
category of classification have similar properties and can be understood with
similar explanations or the same explanation but then with the different problem situations you
might want to classify things differently like you know just like in biology we may wish to
sometimes we want to classify things as mammals and birds and reptiles and so on and on other
occasions we may want to classify them as aquatic creatures and terrestrial creatures and aerial
creatures and so on so classifications are useful relative to the problems that they are
that you want to talk about and it's the same with abstractions it's definitely true that
some abstractions as you say like knowledge and information more generally don't exist unless
they're instantiated so they have to have this extra element of being instantiated but that's
also true of there are there are more classifications than that even even among pure abstractions
there there are abstractions that it seems to be important in mathematics to like i said to
distinguish between abstractions that involve infinite sets and abstractions that don't and then
the whole idea of a set is is not universally applicable so the set of all sets it famously
turned out even before girdle it turned out that this from russell that it turned out that the
set of all sets isn't a set um so you then you have to invoke a class it's it's just a class of
things or the set of all sets that don't contain itself so there's that's right so there's but
it doesn't help because there's it doesn't help with everything because there's no such thing as
the class of all classes either right so uh yes there there are different kinds of things and
another thing which which i think is still slightly mysterious is what kind of an abstraction the laws
of physics are some people think precisely by arguments such as such as you've mentioned that
there really are no laws of physics all there are are physical events and physical processes
and laws are just a kind of way of summarizing physical events and processes they just are
so because i see that that looking out of the window i can see that the sky is cloudless at the
moment that is some kind of emergent consequence of the laws of physics but it if it's true then
people who deny that there are laws of physics will say well that's just a fact about the universe
and you could you could summarize it and say that on three of the four days of this week the sky was
clear and that's not a law of nature so why should we why why should there be anything special
about the statement that nothing can exceed the speed of light well it's because the statement
that nothing exceeds the speed of light is not just a prediction it is an explanation it's an
explanation of how the universe is that the universe is a four-dimensional pseudo-rimanian
manifold with a metric and and and so on and so on and the fact that the speed of light is finite
emerges from that explanation and you could write down all the predictions that follow from that
uh in a sort of infinitely long list of things like like this dog can't run faster than light and
this car can't travel faster than light and what once you've made that uh infinitely long list or
maybe just very long very very long list you would have written down everything that can be deduced
about what happens in nature but you wouldn't have ever listed that law and you wouldn't have
ever mentioned manifolds and four-dimensional or anything like that well you'd have some
significant explaining to do wouldn't you uh it well if you wanted explanations you'd have a
lot of explaining to do you would in fact have all the explaining to do at the end of that huge
process that you had at the beginning you wouldn't have explained anything we were we were just talking
about how um the nature of physical laws and whether or not and to what extent they might be
pure abstractions or a kind of abstraction of some kind and I was just thinking to myself that
for anyone who denies the existence of physical laws in their own right laws of physics and to
just say well there are just facts of matter about the universe for example the orbits of
planets going around stars are approximately circular or elliptical then those facts of the
matter those regularities in nature seem to be crying out for an explanation so to deny that
there would be really existing physical laws behind those regularities in nature seems to me to be
going to a lot of work to avoid what might otherwise be called Occam's razor well isn't
the simple explanation there are physical laws out there governing these things yes uh of course
if somebody insists on the non-existence of explanations like exactly like insistence on
the non-existence of anything you can't be proved wrong but I think the motivation for
denying the existence of laws is the old mistake of empiricism it is the assumption
that raw facts or raw sensory impressions have a privileged status in that in that we can access
them directly and this is this people contrast this with things like laws and explanations in
general which they say we can't access directly so so they are they have some kind of a lesser
reality and we can in principle not insist on there being real one can insist on there not
being real and it doesn't make any difference but the trouble with that is that exactly the
same is true of sense impressions as well and so this argument that abstractions don't really
exist or that laws don't really exist and so on are hidden in there is the assumption that
sense impressions or that kind of thing do really exist in some sense of really which is itself a
mistake that all knowledge is conjectural all observations are theory laden there is nothing
that is an authoritative source of knowledge everything is conjecture and so what once you've
realized that everything is conjecture but that knowledge can still exist then the reason for
making a distinction between different kinds of existence well no there is a distinction between
different kinds of existence but the justification the motivation for denying that certain things
exist even if we need them in our explanations goes away and this once one becomes at least
somewhat familiar with the worldview that you've presented in your books and with poppers worldview
it's it's very difficult to try and reimagine what people mean by directly observe i i struggle
now to try and conceive of what one really means when they say well there are certain things you
can just observe you can just see but on explaining to them well let's think about what that whole
process of seeing actually consists of of photons you know being absorbed and then re-emitted back
towards the eye and then being converted into electrical signals which then go into your brain
this this whole concept of direct observation actually itself vanishes into a cloud of explanation
not so much a cloud but a a kind of way of understanding the world that denies the possibility
of direct observation i don't even know what someone really intends by this terminology this
why of denying the reality of things which we don't have direct observe don't have direct
access to when we don't have direct access to anything even i would tentatively argue that
even the contents of our own minds i agree in a way the contents of our own minds are are quite a
highly sophisticated kind of knowledge that we only know through an extensive chain of interpretations
some of which are notoriously unreliable you know even in everyday language we we we know
what we mean when we say you're just fooling yourself or the content of those ideas is incompatible
with empiricism with the idea that knowledge reliable knowledge comes from the senses and
i think people regard that as just one of those things you know it's it's it's one of the mysteries
of nature it's it's the problem of induction or something like that and you say it's hard to imagine
what people mean when they when they talk about direct observation it's interesting that that
concept of direct observation also had to be invented at one time and in fact it was quite a
liberation when it was first invented like in various stages there was there was empiricism
in in the john lock sense is relatively recent but but the idea that we can gain knowledge
by looking at the world which is false was these concepts of knowledge and looking and reliable
and that kind of thing they're not built into our genes somebody invented those concepts and at
the time when they invented them they were an improvement on on something that was more vague
and more false than that trust the authority or something for example yes but there was a time
when you didn't even have to say trust the authorities when uh trusting the authorities
was just the way that the world was and nobody bothered to put that into words that reminds
me of the divine right of kings which is a concept that was invented only after the authority of kings
was questioned yes well this all raises the fact that there is this creativity going on this creation
of concepts in order to try and come to better understand the world that is the uniquely creative
capacity of the human mind and mind itself how do you understand the nature of mind i sometimes
think of it as this abstraction i think you've said this to me it's a it's a it's a it's a funny
kind of abstraction it's an abstraction that itself needs to be instantiated in matter but also
needs to be running it can't just be like any other piece of knowledge which you can transmit
from one place to another in different physical forms and that's one way of understanding what
knowledge is it allows itself to continue to persist over time and to get itself copied to get
itself replicated but our mind a human mind this thing that is enabling the creation of this knowledge
it itself it is an unusual kind of abstraction how do you think of it at the moment yes so it's
an unusual kind of knowledge so we have yet another classification uh a mind is a kind of a
kind of knowledge you might say but it's a kind of knowledge that doesn't only have to be instantiated
but as you have just said it has to be running now what does that mean running how fast running in
what because uh running in the wrong kind of computer would make it gibberish or in a kind of
computer that has the wrong mapping to to reality we don't know how it works we don't know how the
mind so the mind is characterized by creativity i think we can go that far at least the human
mind is characterized by creativity but we don't know what creativity is we don't know what
the distinction is between a computer program that is running creatively and one that is not
running creatively uh one day we will know but we don't know yet i i think also there are and again
minds that minds exist is common sense even though we don't know how they work or what specifically
they are so more recent ideas that maybe minds don't exist that had to be invented too uh it is
not at all common sense and it doesn't at all follow from any good philosophy but we don't know
and uh one of the things i think that that is a misconception that dates from a very long time
ago is is that a mind is like mostly consistent that it consists of uh the ideas in the mind
are mostly consistent and when they're inconsistent that's a kind of emergency and and we have to
fix that because we have because that does that that means that it's not a proper mind really
um it's it's uh contains inconsistencies rather and therefore that's no different from
uh a load of propositions written down on a piece of paper i don't think that's true at all i i i think
a better way to think of the mind is as a set of problems and a problem consists of conflicting
theories so uh or rather a problem is is more like some conflicting theories that we have noticed
because we don't really think of something as a problem unless it's giving rise to some thought
so uh but but there must be ideas that are conflicting with each other before we have noticed
it and so the mind i i think of it as sort of massive tangled ideas which are largely inconsistent
the parts of it which we have sorted out into a kind of consistency are a minority
that are currently not uh giving rise to any thought they might be invoked in some
thought that's about some other inconsistency but the part of the mind that is thinking is
full of inconsistency and so therefore a model of the mind that thinks of the mind as a set of
consistent propositions with occasional inconsistencies that we then fix it is uh i i i think very far
from the truth it's it's not a set of consistent ideas and it's not a set of propositions because
propositions have a definite truth value they each proposition is either true or false and it has a
perfectly definite meaning if it has a meaning uh whereas the ideas in minds don't have a definite
meaning and they're not precisely true or false we can make them have as sharp a meaning as our
current problem situation requires that's what we should be aiming for and we can make them as
consistent as the current problem situation requires and we're striving you talked earlier about
about uh truth we're striving to make them as true as the current problem situation requires
yes so it sounds that whatever the nature of the mind is in a computational sense has to be
radically different to any other kind of program that we've hitherto encountered because all those
other programs are written in such a way that it's proposition after proposition perhaps one
following from another it's an algorithm of a kind and these statements need to be consistent
or the computer program itself isn't going to run but you're saying that it's possibly the case that
underlying this uniquely creative capacity of the human mind is something that is quite the
mirror image of that in in at least some respects and maybe this is this is what is needed in order
to uh go some way to explaining what's going on here with um uh creativity or another way
that you've put that in the beginning infinity is of course um explanatory universality this idea
that even if there were other kinds of creativity prior to us what we have is a kind of creativity
which allows us to create knowledge which is going to be able to solve problems in principle
about anything that exists in the physical universe which brings me to one of my little
hobby horses which is this uh concept that people sometimes raise that well there might be snalions
out there the super advanced aliens who are going to have uh some successor to the successor to the
successor of the unification of quantum theory in general relativity and even if they could bring it
to us we wouldn't understand it it would be written in a mathematics that's too complicated
for us or consists of concepts that are beyond our puny human minds to understand either that or
you know the super intelligence is going to come along at some point in the future and it too is
going to recognize that it's so much smarter than us and we probably all deserve to be exterminated
something like that um what's wrong with these I think quite commonly held views about other
kinds of minds super advanced alien minds or super intelligent artificial intelligences
again of course we can't prove that such things don't exist uh there's there's a very famous one
called god which there have been disputes about um uh for many centuries they have
yes I I mean uh even the bible speaks of unbelievers so they they must have existed at
right yes um and to be a believer in that kind of entity means that you're you're believing in an
entity whose mind whose mental processes are first of all not embedded in physics not instantiated
in physics in in the same way that ours are and also that they can reach further they can understand
things that things embedded in mere physics can never understand and you can't prove that's false
but it is a bad explanation as I as I point out in the beginning of infinity and so one thing is that
that there are many such theories and there are there are many theories about such entities
whether they be snalians or gods or devils or demons or artificial general intelligences
those theories since they're bad explanations they have the property that uh if two people
such believers in different ones come to persuade me of their view then there's nothing I can do
to choose between them it's it's uh like they are invoking some non-understandable thing
and the two of them are invoking some two non-understandable things with a non-understandable
difference between them so uh I would like to you know put both those people into a sack
and tie it shut and then only have to debate with the survivor just for efficiency
very good so that that that's related to this idea that again problems are soluble and what I
would suggest is that a kind of a special case of that almost is that the all evils are due to
lack of knowledge principle of optimism that you have but here it's really interesting the
principle of optimism this claim that all evils are due to a lack of knowledge seems to be linking
quite strongly epistemology stuff about knowledge to evil stuff about morality isn't that a big
leap surely people who do evil things are doing evil things because of their ideas which is to say
what they know it's not a lack of knowledge is it it's it's a it is the presence of some knowledge
oh well that's the same thing uh they they they are doing it because their knowledge is inadequate
is false in in some relevant way and even the the good guys their knowledge is better than the
bad guys but it's still not true it's not perfect it can be improved the good in fact the good guys
are characterized to a large extent by the fact that they are open to correcting their existing
knowledge and to adopting better ideas that they previously didn't know yes I think it it's the
it's the natural thing it should be one's first guess that moral knowledge is included in in the
same epistemology as physical or mathematical knowledge because as I've said the arguments
that there are different kinds of knowledge depending on some kind of privilege access to
one or the other is just a mistake it's it's uh you know empiricism or something of the kind
that that is is just a not understanding the conjectural nature of all ideas yes and that
include must include moral ones and mathematical ones and physical ones and and so on and the
uniformly the way to get better ideas is to try to get better explanations in the light of the
problems that one has with those ideas there might be I think there's even another way that
the beginning of infinity does create a strong link in one's mind between epistemology and
morality and that would be in the moral injunction do not destroy the means of error correction so
there we have you know error correction that's epistemology and do not do this thing okay so
there's a moral claim now I wanted to focus on this for a minute because this might raise an issue
within constructor theory and that this is your new physics along with your new theory of physics
along with Chiara Marletto about the physics of the possible and the impossible or the possible
and impossible transformations I think is one way it might be described and among many things to be
excited about with this approach is the link it seems to me between physics and epistemology and
we already know some of this story we we know that what can be proven in mathematics depends
on what we know about what the laws of physics are and how the laws of physics operate and
because we know that proofs in mathematics are a kind of computation computation requires a
computer the computer has to be made out of something they made out of matter the matter
obeys laws of physics so we can only prove things that the laws of physics say it is possible to
prove but constructor theory seems to be generalizing this further I'm not sure if that'd be fair to say
so we're going beyond mathematics now and perhaps into realms where we are saying look some things
are not possible to know and some things are possible to know even outside of mathematics but
there may be things impossible to know in history for example or in science because there'll be no
transformation allowing us to actually construct the knowledge that solves the problem there but
this if I've just gone way off the rails in my reasoning here would seem to contradict the
problems a soluble claim in the beginning infinity though the one example I want to call on I think
you might have mentioned this in the fabric of reality I can't remember but it's something to
the effect of let's say you wanted to know what Augustus Caesar 8 on his 13th birthday that's a
reasonable scientific question but it might also be unknowable but it's not going to be a problem
for our understanding because it's going to be inherently uninteresting it's not going to solve
any actual historical problems but is this way of thinking about how constructor theory comes to
bear on morality and epistemology at all valid I think that one can address that issue without
using constructor theory directly if constructor theory works then there will be a theory of
knowledge within constructor theory just like there'll be a theory of quantum mechanics within
constructor theory we don't know how these subsidiary theories whether these subsidiary
theories will be changed or if they have to be changed to what extent they have to be our theory
of knowledge is nowhere near as as precise and accurate as theories about physics I don't quite
understand your question because suppose we had a problem about Caesar's what Caesar 8 on his 13th
birthday I think the example I usually use is Julius Caesar's last meal ah yes yes never mind I mean
Augustus Caesar's 13th birthday meal is just as good um if some problem depended on knowing that
as a as a solution then it's not accurate to cast this this problem in terms of having to have
evidence of what it was you know this is this is not necessarily a question of which observables
can be observed in physics we know that most of the observables the detailed observables
of the past are have been randomized to such an extent that it would require an infeasible
amount of collection of knowledge an infeasible amount of measurement shall we say to to reconstitute
it and that might well be true I mean if it isn't true of of these Caesar meal events it'll be true
of some lots of events it'll be true of most events at the time so assume that that it is
infeasible because of the laws of physics and this could be expressed precisely in constructive theory
to measure Julius Caesar's last meal that doesn't mean that we can't solve the problem that gave rise
to this question because it can't be a question about physics from from the point of view of
physics this is a very uninteresting question so it would be a thing it would be a question about
history or about sociology yes or about you know some subject that hasn't been invented yet in which
there would be explanations that rival explanations both of which had reasonable arguments in their
favor and which somebody decided could be resolved by making this measurement and then it turns out
this measurement is impossible well that doesn't mean that it can't be resolved in other ways
yes I mean we we know that that last meal was not a cheeseburger
and that is not because we have measurements to that effect it's because we have high level theories
about the development of human culture and the problem about what he ate etc would have come
out of that kind of field yes precisely if we may well come out of that kind of field as well
yeah I can only imagine that the question would arise if there was a problem about how and why
he died so if it was Julius Caesar and there was some concern that maybe he'd been poisoned
just before he died well then there would presumably be theories about you know existing
historical documents about how various other people living with him at the time didn't particularly
like him and then presumably although we might not be able to tell what his final meal was
some very smart forensic scientist might be able to detect some kind of toxin in
where his stomach used to be so I imagine that even a problem like this it wouldn't be framed and
exactly those words what was his last meal but it might be you know some some some other kind of
historical question exactly it would arise out of some problem that wasn't a physics problem for
sure yes but by the way there is this problem with Napoleon you know did did he die of wallpaper
right because you know it's it's controversial how Napoleon died he wasn't that old
and he had some symptoms which are consistent with arsenic poisoning and there were people
who who would would have preferred to see him dead and then other people have said well yes it was
arsenic poisoning but it was because of the wallpaper the the color of the wallpaper was
was caused by arsenic paint and other people who said yes so there was arsenic in the wallpaper
but not enough to kill him and so on and so on and this problem is eminently addressable
not by going and finding video evidence of the poisoner okay so the following popper and like
myself and I was in that tradition we don't place any real currency on the source of an idea
because any idea can be evaluated utterly independent of its source or its author
and I can take all that on board I think you go even further in this that you're not even interested
much in the origin of ideas or the history of ideas and this is actually encapsulated in what
Naval has been at pains to point out in his podcast with me anyway but he's not much interested
in names who said what and so on it's basically about the ideas and I think that's quite right
nevertheless personally and I guess there's a point of indulgence for than anything else
I am interested in the history of ideas to some extent so you know I like to know the fact that
Einstein really was the prime originator of general relativity but it's interesting to know
that Marcel Grausman for example helped him and you know I think one or more of his wives might
have helped him as well with the mathematics on general relativity um so it's it's interesting
historically about how these great theories kind of came to us what the lineage is now that brings
me to this question about quantum computation I'm interested in this because you were inspired
obviously by Turing and your paper as of I think it was last week anyway it's now been cited 6122
times which is no small feat that that paper being titled quantum theory the church Turing
principle in the universal quantum computer what I wanted to ask you about that is as you wrote it
because I think when Turing wrote his paper on the Turing machine he was thinking well it's an
abstract mathematical object this isn't going to have much I don't know did did he think it was
going to have much in the way of a huge industry of engineering these things was going to follow I
don't know if that was in his mind but did you have any sense in writing the paper about quantum
computation that it would have spawned an industry a multi-billion dollar at the moment industry of
racing to build these things did that enter your mind at the time no I was entirely concerned with
the laws of physics and that this was a hitherto unsuspected facet of quantum theory that it had
this intimate relationship with computation so I had in the back of my mind that maybe this could
be built a quantum computer could be built for the purpose of demonstrating or testing
properties of the laws of physics of quantum theory but I wasn't concerned with
with practical uses of it at all and not even other laboratory uses of it and by the way
I think I'm not a so I'm not a historian of science I don't know much about the history of ideas in
general yes only certain very narrow facets but I think that history in general is an extremely
important worthwhile subject and the history of ideas in particular is I think the most
important aspect of history it's just that I happen you know to to have studied other things
mostly but I think that Turing was also not interested at the time when he wrote that paper
in making anything useful Babbage interestingly was yes and the for him
the again I'm going by TV documentaries rather than any real research of my own
but it seems that that he was initially concerned with a very practical application of computers
namely the autumn automation of the printing of mathematical tables which had to do with
navigation and and so on and that he he even when he conceived of the universal version of
this machine which was then called the analytical engine he still wasn't then what he saw was this
this was a universal machine for arithmetic and for algebra but or not even for algebra I'm not
sure for arithmetic at least and it was Lovelace who saw that that this machine would be universal
in the sense that we mean today yes yes and so that then that leads me to the question that
I don't want it to be too uncomfortable but there is this question about was it church was it
Turing and now of course you bring in Babbage as well and Lovelace she says was the first to figure
out that these machines could be universal well to what extent do you think Feynman understood
the universality of a quantum computation did he have a conception of it at all around the
time when you were writing this paper or was it only in light of you telling him about the proof
that he then sort of got what you were going on about I don't know I only met him once and we
had a long conversation only part of which was about quantum computation and and I was not at all
focused on finding out what he knows right okay yes so I don't know but I know that in in his
published work there is no real hint of the thing that is now called a universal quantum computer
or actually it's now more often called the universal quantum Turing machine which is a very
bad bad terminology but there's although he again he was aware that quantum computation
could be more powerful than classical computation and he was aware of a certain level of universality
but his idea for how to how to make one of these was itself to put on some kind of circuit board
a quantum system that had specially tuned Hamiltonians whereas in the real quantum computer
the special tuning is itself a quantum program it's there is a single machine you don't have to
change the hardware to make to make to to compute a new quantum computation there is a single machine
that can be programmed to enact any quantum computation and I I don't think in I don't
think there's any hint of that in Feynman's published work although the speed with which
he cottoned on to the algorithm that I explained to him suggests that he was on the verge of that
either before I spoke to him or just after okay two final just purely for fun questions
as you said who cares this is this is true this is true except for historians of science I'm sure
in the in the years and decades to come this will be a certainly a point of interest maybe in
future they'll analyze the wallpaper and find out yes okay this question is just purely for fun
um do you have any opinion on tic-tacs that's a big thing going on at the moment and do you
know what I'm talking about no I don't know what it is oh okay so this is the the American military
specifically I think the navy who've released these videos of what they say are unidentified
objects of some kind and I know this is ridiculous they say things like they're
violating laws of physics or at least they are evidence of technology which is not
explicable given the current state of technology you haven't heard about these things seen anything
about these things nor have any opinion on these things well now that you mention it I I've seen
things on twitter right which are now explicable in the light of is it the the American military
or something having having said something about UFOs yes I see okay well the opportunities for
error are enormous and to perform a scientific experiment that is is a crucial test of sophisticated
scientific theories is very very difficult and and universally almost universally underestimated
it's sort of taken for granted that that einstein did a very difficult thing but it's not so much
understood the stern and gullach who who uh did experiments on quantum superpositions of
particles in different positions but they did an amazing thing as well yes good experiments are
rare and they require usually a great deal of skill and creativity and it's not the kind of thing
that military pilots or policemen are typically cognizant of yes so I think when people like that
report a thing that quote violates the laws of physics I would consider it unreasonable
to go for any explanation of that other than human error yes yes and of course when you do
look at the the footage there is no apparent violation laws of physics even if you grant
that this thing is moving at a high velocity beyond anything that we might be capable of that's still
sub light speed so it hasn't violated relativity on the one hand and by the way even if you
don't have an answer for what's going on there well that's kind of where you might have to
stop you don't immediately leap to its uh aliens from the other side of the galaxy um my last question
is from my father and I I'll just ask you this before I go it's about dark energy and uh we know
the universe is accelerating in its expansion it's behaving as if there is negative pressure
on the outside of the observable universe isn't this evidence that the observable universe is
actually inside of a much larger region itself of lower density but magnificently greater size
perhaps infinite in size and perhaps it's actually got zero density perhaps this void beyond our
universe is the thing into which the universe is necessarily expanding because we've got positive
pressure inside of our universe and outside of that outside of our universe that's negative
pressure could this be a solution so first of all dark energy is just the name given to this
anomalous expansion in which we haven't explained yes so I think the reason that dark energy was
chosen as a name is because of dark matter where the all reasonable theories of it so far have
postulated that it's a kind of matter and it's dark because because it doesn't interact with
with photons and so on with dark energy we don't have such a thing we we don't know that there
is a source of pressure or that these observations are caused by something pushing on the universe
and so on but with the prevailing theories of what dark energy does never mind what it is but
what it does the universe is not expanding into anything the universe is is the length scales in
the universe are increasing intrinsically and this is the same the same as was the case with the
with the prevailing theories before dark energy that the universe initially had well at any rate
very near to the big bang it was very small there was a time when it was only the size of an atom
there was a time when it was only the size of a neutron and so on and at that time and now it's
much bigger the difference between then and now is not that it has expanded to fill a void it has
just expanded intrinsically yes and some of the present theories say that it is in fact infinitely
large and that it is infinite infinitely large and homogeneous so that the the total amount of
matter in it is infinite i don't think that there are any theories i mean one could easily write
down a theory in which the universe was inhomogeneous and we are in the only place in it that has
matter right yes that wouldn't help in any way with any of the existing theories and more generally
by the way theories of inhomogeneity in the universe as far as i know i'm not an expert on this but i
think they've only been invoked by people who want to say that there is no dark energy that it's just
a coincidence caused by inhomogeneities excellent okay i think that absolutely answered the question
i think that will do for now but i hope not for the last time i make my way through the fabric
of reality after all now at the moment so perhaps at the end of that we can speak again if not
sooner so thank you very much for writing the books i think they've been well the explanations
that transform the world i think they've been life transforming for many people so it's been
wonderful to talk to you very gratifying today to have this conversation so have a wonderful
remainder of the day yourself same to you it's always fun chatting
so there we go i hope you enjoyed that i certainly did as i say i'm working on what might be called
interview technique it's a steep learning curve the content of deutch and poppers oevoir is deep
and subtle enough but adding to that how to run a podcast and being surrounded by new upgraded
podcast hardware and software that i'm struggling to learn to use is a whole other thing but hopefully
will improve rapidly over the coming weeks and months if you're a new listener i'd encourage
you to go out and to listen to all of the david deutch content that is out there here's ted
talks and other interviews of course buy his books subscribe to my podcast here wherever
you're listening there is a youtube version as i say if you are on audio only which sometimes
has those pretty visuals subscribe to the neval podcast where we are exploring all the major
themes in the fabric of reality and the beginning of infinity and neval is broadening all that content
out into the realms of wealth wisdom and life and finally if you're so inclined go to www.bretthall.org
and follow the links there to support this podcast there are lots of great podcasts out there all
about science and philosophy and even thinking but i think here we have a small community uniquely
devoted to a particularly special kind of clear thinking about life informed by the best that
science and philosophy can teach us we'd like to grow so the ideas can reach into places where the
errors need correcting so i'll keep doing my bit until next time let me steal a line from neval
and say stay optimistic bye
do